in Texas. OK, let me first of all point out, I spent
one summer in Austin studying under Hugo
Leipziger and getting acquainted with some of the
faculty. This was in 1947, studying under some of
the faculty there who were in the School of
Architecture. Individually, there are several
people through the years that seem to have had
especially strong interest in planning at UT
Austin. Hugo, of course, being one of those. But
what I have seen at that institution is planning
being pushed to one side, never accepted as either
an equal partner or a parallel operation compared
to the rest of the program in the School of
Architecture. That's point one. Point two,
at UT Arlington, very strong dominance by
architecture faculty over planning, and I think
more so than in Austin, a view being expressed by
the head of the School of Architecture, that
architects know how to plan, but planners don't
know how to do architecture. Who was the head? I
don't know who it is now. Box at one time was out
there. Do you mean Box? Well, Box was one of those.
Of course, he's now at UT Austin. Now at UT Austin,
that's right. But he was one of the influences. On
the other hand, I must tell you, my daughter,
Molly, just recently has enrolled in some
architecture courses at UT Arlington. And one of
the instructors is a person that worked for me when
I had my own private practice in Fort Worth from 69
until 75. And this person is Dick Ferrier, who's an
excellent illustrator, very talented
individual. And he commented to Molly how much he
appreciated working in and for a planner in that
environment as distinguished from working in an
architectural office, which I thought was kind of
interesting because he made this connection.
I think the thing that has happened
at UT Arlington has perhaps been one more of
disappointment in the lack of raising the level of
sights of
the academic side, failure to raise the sights of
community leadership about the contributions,
the potential contributions of planning in the
local communities. Now let me just share
something by contrast. When Bill Parker, my
predecessor in Austin, was still a student at UT
Austin, he was out in the field doing, as an
undergraduate thesis, doing a study in a
community. It was a community up here near Wichita
Falls. He engendered a lot of positive support for
planning through that. But I don't hear of that,
haven't heard of that since coming out of students
out of UT Austin. I hate to say it, I haven't heard of
the students coming out of A&M, but I haven't heard
of the students coming out of Arlington. I don't
hear of them going out in the summer and doing the
study and getting a lot of community support and
very positive interest and not making the splash,
but leaving something behind that the people in
the community can hang their hats on and feel good
about. The only times that I've heard anything, it
seems to have been more in the nature of a very
academic . Do us a quick and dirty sketch plan. And
that's not where you build a lot of support across
the state for programs like this. My own feeling is
that the programs need to be preparing those
students, whether it's in terms of year
structure, freshman, sophomore, junior,
senior, and then two years of graduate study. But
they need to be building themselves into a
position where the students get out in an active
situational context at some point, whether it's
fourth year or graduate year, working on these
studies. Excuse me, just a minute.
Let me add one additional footnote to all of this in
terms of my concern. I'm speaking initially here
of the concept of the planning program built into a
bachelor of city planning.
I think what happened at UT Arlington was this
concept of urban design taking over. And anybody
who graduated urban design, therefore, was a
planner. Ergo was a planner. And as I commented to
you a little earlier, Bob, I see people practicing
architecture, people who are acknowledged
the Dallas community as being good architects
whose work, when you look at it on the ground from
the outside, do not reflect an understanding of
the relationships of the building to the
landscape to the circulation patterns for
pedestrians on site to automobiles on site, even
use the hotel where you were staying. do not
understand what motivates people to act as they
do, like where they park. And we have a classic
example up the street here where everybody's
parking along a main thoroughfare. Rather than
driving in and getting at their front door,
they're coming in the back door just because it
happens to be close to the thoroughfare. Things
such as that that are a recognition of lack
consideration of the sociology, the human scale,
the motivational things that affect people.
Activity patterns. Activity patterns, yes. The
whole way people live is not, outside the building
is not seen as something to be considered. It's
only what's inside the building. And you take care
of these other things in a maybe in a sophisticated
appearance way, but you don't take care of them in
terms of the generic operation of that little
community of people. So the double car garage is
converted to a storeroom. Right. And we have all
the cars parked out in the driveway. All around the
street. Simply because people find that that's
really where they want to be. And nobody thought
about where these people are going to park.
There's no I guess my concern here is that
negatively, because the schools of architecture
don't seem to deal with the problems of
out-of-building activities and what motivates
human beings out of the building, they frankly do a
lot of damage, particularly in site planning. But
that spills over into the larger domain of what
happens when you dump traffic on streets and where
people are going for their shopping and all of the
other things. In terms of undergraduate
programs, and you pointed out, you do not have an
undergraduate program in city planning. But I
think that one of our failures is the lack of a good,
solid foundation program that will lead students
into a two-year graduate program in planning. And
I don't see it as anything less than a two-year
professional degree program. I think it has to be
that. You mentioned that at A&M, that, in essence,
is what you have in the students. You have this
field experience requirement, the internship. I
think that's essential in a graduate program. I
don't see that it can be any other way. But if
anybody is going to be telling folks, when you come
out of a design school at the undergraduate level,
you are prepared to be a planner, then I would want
to look very closely at the design of that
curriculum to find out whether they are getting
some understanding of all of these human elements
that are involved. And most design schools don't
want to relinquish that time so that those human
elements are going to be adequately discussed.
There's not, other than a student accidentally in
an undergraduate program taking a course in
psychology, one course maybe, or one or two
courses in sociology, or maybe taking beyond the
required state government course of course, in
local government. Other than that, they don't get
much that says, here is the in which this planning
activity goes on. It's kind of, to me, as if the
message that Patrick Geddes made years and years
ago from his outlook tower in Edinburgh, you have
to look at the total picture. You can't do your
design in the absence of the total picture. Now,
this is what made me wonder initially when I first
took a look at the planning in Anchorage and then
later on the planning in Fort Worth, the sector
approach. Because I had severe questions.
professionally about the success of the sector
approach and if it would indeed be compatible with
a comprehensive approach okay let me respond to
that because I think we did some things there that
did show compatibility one was that as
recommendations came in from the sector councils
the sector planning councils Who led those? These
were the
staff assisted, but really the people in that
sector were the ones who identified what they saw
as their critical problems. The staff responded
and said, all right, here are your problems, here
are your alternatives in dealing with this, and
here are the consequences of alternatives. Then
the people thrashed through the process Is this
better or is this better or is this better? And they
would come back then and say, for our sector, here
is what we would like to see. That was a
recommendation of the Planning Commission. So
the staff then operated more or less like a
secretariat. A technical secretariat that also
was the transmission line for information and
that the sector planning councils could and did
repeatedly ask for technical information.
whether it was in transportation, whether it was
in parks, open space, whether it was in housing,
whether it was in commercial industrial,
whatever, commercial generators, whatever. So
it was a constant two-way street. But the results
of that went to the planning commission. And the
commission said, this fits within the guidelines
or the principles that we have adopted. about
circulation, about open space, about housing. We
want you, staff, to go back and inform the Sector
Planning Council that we find these principles
being satisfied, these concepts acceptable, but
here's one that we can't buy. And here's why we
can't buy it. Because the adjoining sector has a
different set of constraints or problems to deal
with. Whatever it might be. asked them to go
through that and explain to them what these
problems are in this other sector. Through that
process, there was a lot of sharing and there were
some changes in things. But let me tell you, the one
thing that has been very successful in that
program,
sector one, which is the TCU area, and it was chosen
purely by happenstance, The Sector Planning
Council in that sector began in 1967 or 68. 68,
I guess.
Those people are still identified. They identify
themselves as members of the Sector Planning
Council. And they, either in a large group or with
representatives will appear at the city council
meetings and say, we represent the sector
planning council from sector one. Here is what we
recommended in the plan. Here's what the planning
commission adopted. And here's what we expect you
to live up to. Have you found that the sector
planning councils have ever been an incubation
mechanism for rising politicals or people? Oh,
yes. Yes, it did. In fact, it was very interesting.
In the first two sectors,
the city council member from that sector, who
happened to live in that sector, wherever it might
have been, the county commissioner who happened
to live in that sector, the school board member who
happened to live in that sector, they would always
show up at sector planning council meetings. And I
talked with a couple of those people, and they told
me this. They said, in essence, it came down to, we
feel not an obligation to be here, but as people who
are elected to represent maybe the city at large at
that time or who live in this area or do represent a
district here, we feel it's our obligation to be
here and to keep on top of what these people are
saying. Otherwise, we cannot represent them.
Like Martin Meyerson said, it's sort of a
pulse-taking operation. Right. And it was more
than that. It was more than that, because they
would also infuse information about what was
financially possible, what the constraints were
on city or county or school district. They could do
that. And they could do it. And they could do it
authoritatively.
And the people knew these were our neighbors. So
there was a high level of acceptance. Now, in the
later sectors, I don't know how successful that
involvement was or how extensive it was, but I do
know it worked in the first couple sectors, very
much so. I suppose it would depend on resident
leadership. Right. In answer to one of your
questions, though, about the sectors, in sector
one, which was the TCU area, We actually, as a
result of the involvement of the people, changed
the boundaries of the sector because there was an
area east of TCU that said, these were the people
speaking in this area, we do not belong in that
sector. We belong in the south sector. We have more
that we are. compatible with in terms of ideas and
concerns and needs with people who are two miles to
the east of us than with people who are two blocks to
the west of us. And so the Sector Planning Council
in that case voted to recommend back to the
Planning Commission that the boundaries be
changed. And so they weren't, the sector
boundaries weren't precise lines. They wound up
showing this precise lines on the map, but they
were conceptual lines, if you would. They were
corridors more than anything else, sort of gray
zones around the sectors. And to that extent, I
think the sector planning approach has been very
successful. If nothing else, the fact that it has
kept people for 15 and 20 years involved in their
community, where before that they were speaking
as one, they then felt they had a group that was
knowledgeable, that had gone through a lot of
discussion, spent many, many hours arguing pros
and cons on issues, and that they could speak with
authority. It sounds like a substantially
different experience than what happened in
Austin with the neighborhood planning council.
Oh, yes. Yeah. I don't think there's anything
comparable in the Austin experience. Well, there
was. Initially, but this large... Yes, and
largely this then was bypassed by staff, much to
the chagrin of people like Joan Bartz and so forth,
who was president of the neighborhood councils.
It ended up with the Austin Tomorrow Plan, which
was a non-plan, and had to... be given redirection
by the governing body, the city council, because
there was no plan diagram. All it was was a word
plan. And now, of course, with the departure of
Dick Lilly, the new directors, of course, they
have two planning departments now, have been
directed to move ahead with the formulation of a
comprehensive plan for Austin.
What do you think of them apples? So we'll just have
to see what comes out of it all. I guess one of the
things I would say about Austin is that they may not
have, and I don't know what the scale was on their
neighborhood planning councils, but it may well
have been that what we saw in Fort Worth was
multiple neighborhoods forming a sector. I see.
Austin, in other words, I guess if you translate
that into Austin, it would be all of the east side
from the inter-regional highway all the way out
would be a sector. They may have split that into
several units. And when you do that, then we were
talking basically in Fort Worth of communities of
a minimum of 50,000 population as a sector. That
was kind of a ballpark figure, unless it was
essentially undeveloped area, in which case the
50,000 was still seen as a projected total
population. That was a minimum, 50,000, 60,000,
70,000 as the population area. Well, that's a
good-sized community. Oh, yeah. That's a lot
different than a neighborhood. Oh, yeah. So that
may have been part of the difference. Coming back
to the programs and planning, the other thing I
would say is this.
The universities,
you and I have talked about the idea, and frankly, I
agree with it because of my own experience at East
Texas State, the universities, I think, need to
get together on their planning programs. I think
they need to do it in a couple of ways. One is, and I
speak here primarily of the graduate programs,
one is to identify a common core of courses that
students might take at any one of the three schools
and that would be acceptable at any one of the three
schools, speaking of UT, Austin, and A&M, and UT
Arlington. This we're trying to do in the adult
continuing ed program at TWU North Texas, East
Texas. And we're going to be successful. I have no
doubt about it. It may take a time before that can be
accomplished, but I think that there is much for
the three universities that have planning
programs you gain from studying the federation of
North Texas area universities
in terms of how the graduate programs can be
federated to the mutual advantage of the
universities and the students. For example, the
location of A&M is hardly what you'd call urban
oriented. Oh, no. And we are under continuing
disadvantage in not only attracting students to
the campus because of that, but also in our
outreach programs and our community service
programs and our lab work. And it would be far more
useful if these students could be located in their
second year in an urban environment. Sure. It
wouldn't matter much where they were located in
their first year. That's right. For the basic
courses, I don't see that it makes an awful lot of
difference because those are essentially
internally oriented. But the externally
oriented courses, they really need to have the
opportunity to see what happens on the ground. I'm
not, I guess the one thing that gives me concern
there is that the planning agencies in the state,
the city planning agencies, don't have, they're
not the best work environment because of somewhat
being fraught with some political pressures that
are totally external and therefore having some
real problems that way and the other is just a,
maybe not having the strength that they ought to in
city government. Those kinds of things bother me.
But there's no reason that students from the three
schools could not be assigned to work in given
localities in a summer internship or in a long
term. I see even the possibility if the graduate
programs in planning were coupled with a graduate
program in urban studies, for example, or a
graduate program in geography,
or a graduate program in sociology, not social
work, but sociology, that students could not be
put together in teams out in the field. One of my
concerns and it has been a longstanding concern,
is that too many people who are identified as
professional planners come only out of a design
background and know nothing else. Academically,
they don't have any other orientation.
I've been in a very fortunate position in various
places where I've worked. I'm hiring people who
are geographers, and I look for geographers to
hire. I've hired people who are sociologists, and
I look for either sociology or economics as the
primary background of individuals. I've looked
for people who have been engineers, not planners,
but engineers who would have some understanding
of the mechanisms of the community. Frankly, so
I'd have somebody to counterbalance
the engineering advice coming from public works
departments and places like that. I've looked for
people who really had a background in public
administration. In fact, when I was in Fort Worth,
I hired a fellow who had his PhD from Indiana in
public administration. An excellent person.
I felt very good about it. He was constantly
generating ideas and helping loosen up the whole
staff. Helped me tremendously.
But I don't see the planning programs trying to get
their students to hook into individuals like
that. One of my best experiences in graduate
school was at Oklahoma when I was teamed up with a
fellow who was doing graduate work in
architecture at OU. And he was interested in some
regional issues and the implication of some
regional issues for planning and architecture.
He got assigned to my team. Two of us were a team
doing things together. It was great. It was
absolutely great. And I found that a very, very
rewarding experience. Jack Schultz, he was in
Tulsa one time. In fact, for many years he was in
Tulsa.
Bob, let me back up for a moment. Now that it's the
next morning, I'd like to just reflect on a couple
of things. When I was in... Austin, the person who
served for several years as assistant planning
director was Bob Green, Robert Green, who was very
well liked by staff and had a landscape
architecture background from the University of
Western Mass. And he then left and went on to work in
San Antonio. The other two individuals that I
neglected to mention were people in Fort Worth.
Alvin Marsden, who came from the University of
Washington as an architect, he had come in to our
staff. And he was very good in terms of stimulating
some design concepts in connection with planning
efforts for Fort Worth. The other person was Ruben
D. Ramirez, who was also a product of University of
Washington, who likewise did a good deal in the
area of design. Al Marsden returned to Washington
during the time period before I left the city of
Fort Worth. Ruben Ramirez went to Albuquerque as
head of the planning department up there and then
later returned to the Dallas-Fort Worth area and
is currently in practice in the Dallas area. Those
also are perhaps contacts you might want to make.
Well, a little bit further beyond the Fort Worth
experience, in my own private practice, I did
planning work in conjunction with.
Pardon the interruption. In my own private
practice, in conjunction with some engineering
firms and other firms in landscape architecture,
did a series of planning studies in towns